Clarify steady state (#635)
PEtab-dev/PEtab: doc/v2/documentation_data_format.rst

  The time at which the specified condition will become active, in the time
  unit specified in the model. ``-inf`` indicates that the respective
  condition will be simulated until a steady state is reached. The system is
  considered to be at steady state once the time derivative of all
  differential entities is almost zero (where "almost zero" is to be defined by
  the simulator or user), even if there are discontinuities in
  the model (e.g., due to events) that may change the model state

>   at a later time point.

Reviewer: I don't think we can do that and at the same time say we promote reproducible simulations. If we really want that I would prefer to somehow impose a minimum simulation time before a steady state can be reached. 

We still have to test this in some meaningful way in the testsuite.

>   at a later time point.

Author: And after that time, it can be assumed that events can be ignored? Otherwise this will just defer the problem.

Do you mean an option to specify a minimal simulation time for a given pre-equilibration period, or a general statement in the specs?

>   at a later time point.

Reviewer 2: If a minimum simulation time can be specified, does it then hold for a pre-equilibration simulation that any model events are ignored unless a minimum simulation time is specified? (otherwise, it feels like we are going to hit reproducibility problems given that tools can check steady-states in different ways)

>   at a later time point.

Reviewer 2: > Events are allowed after this time only if they do not change the steady state; events that do change the steady state break the reproducibility of the problem so are an error/invalid PEtab problem.

This sounds like will be very hard for a linter to check?

> I would suggest: the user must choose a minimum simulation time (defaults to start time of last experiment period) 

For a pre-equilibration does a last experiment period exist? (as it should be the first simulation in a sequence?)

>   at a later time point.

Reviewer 3: > > Events are allowed after this time only if they do not change the steady state; events that do change the steady state break the reproducibility of the problem so are an error/invalid PEtab problem.
> 
> This sounds like will be very hard for a linter to check?

Agreed, I think a linter can only check whether there are events that might trigger during the last simulation period, or after the minimum simulation time.

> > I would suggest: the user must choose a minimum simulation time (defaults to start time of last experiment period)
> 
> For a pre-equilibration does a last experiment period exist? (as it should be the first simulation in a sequence?)

I meant, if the last period of an experiment starts at t=100, then the minimum simulation time for both preequilibration and steady-state measurement computation is t=100.

It's an arbitrary choice, other options or no default are also fine for me. I think this default could make sense for steady-state measurements, but less so for preequilibration. A nonzero default also means all tools will always have to perform some simulation to compute the state at minimum simulation time, before switching to a Newton solver.

>   at a later time point.

Reviewer: I would opt for a default of 0 and would always allow events but make the steady-state definition event independent.

>   at a later time point.

Author: Thinking about the whole issue again, I agree with Dilan's initial point. We should not prevent tools from doing the right thing.
Formally, the steady-state condition would be $dx/dt = 0$ *and* no time-dependent events for any $t > t_{cur}$, which we should state here.
If a tool ignores the latter condition, there is a chance it won't find the right steady state and we probably shouldn't justify that.

Since already the threshold for $dx/dt$ (or whatever other steady-state criterion any tool might use) is outside the scope of PEtab, maybe we should not introduce a minimum simulation time to keep things simpler.

Tools should clearly document how they handle these cases, though.

>   at a later time point.

Author: > Asking tools to figure out whether there is going to be another event is asking something impossible, which we should not do.

I see that point. However, I wouldn't want to say that some tool that is better at doing that should stop doing that.

How about we don't change the definition of a steady state, but just say that tools *may* stop at dx/dt=0, and that it's on the modeler to avoid any situations where this could cause problems?
It may not be perfect in terms of reproducibility, but that problem starts long before (unspecified integration tolerances, steady state tolerances, ...).

  unit specified in the model. ``-inf`` indicates that the respective
  condition will be simulated until a steady state is reached.

  .. note::

     PEtab does not specify exact steady state conditions. The
     interpretation of steady state is left to the simulator. In general,
     a steady state of a dynamical system is a condition in which the time
     derivative of all differential entities is—and remains—zero.
     Simulators should use reasonable numerical criteria to determine
     whether a steady state has been reached.

     In models with discontinuities, such as events, it may be very difficult
     or practically impossible to determine whether a steady state has
     been reached, and the simulator may choose to stop once the time
     derivative of all differential entities is "almost zero", independent of
     any later discontinuities (where "almost zero" is to be defined by the
     simulator or user). It is on the user to avoid situations where

>      such behavior is problematic.

Reviewer 3: Due to the potential confusion with between steady-state observables and steady-state dynamical systems, here's an alternative suggestion for this note, as well as an additional statement for reproducibility.

> PEtab does not define steady states -- this is left to the simulator/user. One interpretation is that the specific observable that was observed at steady state is the only entity required to be at steady state. Another interpretation is that, for dynamical systems, the time derivative of *all* differential entities is — and remains — (almost) zero. One issue is that it may be difficult to determine whether a state will remain steady into the future, e.g. due to events or a very slowly evolving system. Assessing whether a state is steady is also left to the simulator/user. For reproducibility, users should share their chosen steady-state definition and assessment criteria when sharing their model.

Author: To me, the observable-steady-state interpretation seems rather uncommon and I wouldn't want to bring that up here. It suggests this would be a legitimate steady state interpretation which I don't think we should suggest (although in the end, it's left to the simulator anyway).

Reviewer 3: I think it's uncommon because it's uncommon to have observables when considering steady states. So I think we should consider what a steady state means in the presence of observables. What can the user actually claim about their system? Does the steady state measurement assumption come from observation or theory?

The user might study the mathematical model to understand the steady states theoretically -- in this case, it's about the dynamical system (and observables?). But when a user specifies steady state measurements, this is based on observations rather than theory, so I think the user is actually claiming that what they observe appears to be in steady state. They are not claiming that every state variable in the dynamical system is at steady state. So, why do we define steady states in terms of the dynamical system?

It's fine for me to state that the concept of steady state in PEtab is strictly about the dynamical system to be consistent with systems theory, and that in fact the observables may still be changing (even though it's the observables that are observed to be steady...). But unless you observe all state variables, this seems like a strong assumption that might lead to poor modeling choices. Maybe it's more valid to ask simulators to simulate the observables until they appear steady, to match the observations. This would permit non-steady state variables. Isn't this what we actually want for our use case? How is it that we have observables that involve maybe a couple of state variables, but then the steady state assumption applies to all state variables? This seems like we are then somehow observing all state variables.

Author: > So I think we do need to define what a steady state is, and remove this less clear text from the PR:
> 
> > The interpretation of steady state is left to the simulator.

What do you suggest? We can define a steady state in general, which is kind of there, but I don't think it's desirable to have a numerical steady state criterion/definition written here. We can write something like $\mathrm{someUndefinedFunction}(\dot x) < \mathrm{someUndefinedValue}$, but this would neither be a definition nor helpful. Already AMICI has at least three different ways of checking for a steady state (not even considering different model import options such as the handling of conserved quantities that would affect what the model state is). Do we really want exclude some or all of those features from use with PEtab problems?

Reviewer 3: I rather meant, we can specify exact theoretical steady state conditions, even if the numerical conditions are left to the simulator (I see this as the same as letting simulators choose numerical methods and simulation tolerances in general). The information is there in the current PR but due to

> PEtab does not specify exact steady state conditions. The
     interpretation of steady state is left to the simulator. In general, ...

it reads a bit like PEtab doesn't even strictly define a steady state theoretically. The last part starting with "In general, ..." can be used to clarify this I think. Here's a suggestion.

```suggestion
     In PEtab, a steady-state measurement is a measurement that occurs
     when *all* differential entities are at steady state, meaning that all
     differential entities have reached, and will remain at, a constant value.
     
     Determining whether differential entities are at steady state is left to
     the simulator and user. Reasonable numerical criteria should be used
     to determine whether a steady state is reached. Users should
     share their chosen numerical criteria when sharing their model, for
     reproducibility.
     
     It can be difficult to determine whether the differential entities are
     at steady state. For example, events and other discontinuities may
     occur after an apparent steady state is reached. It is left to the user to
     avoid situations where this issue is problematic.
```

Author: Can you rephrase the first block? This only covers steady-state measurements, but should also include pre-equilibration. I'd just refer to "steady state" in general there, not "steady-state measurement" . Then this works for me.

Reviewer 3: Ah right. Measurements after preequilibration are also not supported since the state at $t_0$ includes changes from the second period condition. Updated.
